alright I'm now gonna make the mistake
of attempting to record a short video on
an enormous topic had a conversation
with another youtuber called Anna's
analysis and I first wrote to her really
appreciate Lee because I felt that what
she was doing was offering a critique of
spiritual gurus spiritual leaders here
on YouTube and on Instagram on social
media and saying hey this this really
isn't up to a high enough standard she
was asking some tough questions like who
are these people to be offering to
intervene in other people's trauma and
other people's lack of self love self
confidence and someone and so forth when
you think about who they are their lack
of educational background the problems
they're still struggling with so on and
so forth in effect she's asking why is
it that people who have nothing going
for them but a pretty face on social
media are managing to charge large
amounts of money for selling spiritual
snake-oil and life advice and what are
the real consequence of this it's a good
set of questions and I sent her fan mail
initially I spoke to her very positive
way saying hey I appreciate that you're
taking on this mantle especially because
she is vegan and in large part this is
discourse going on within the vegan
movement or over at the hippy
spiritualist end of the vegan movement
that I have relatively little to do with
myself however as the conversation went
on it started to raise other really
important questions about truth honesty
and integrity and the ways in which
people get misled especially in politics
living within a digital subculture where
everyone in Instagram is posting the
same kind of half true statements
without anyone doing any fact-checking
without anyone doing research or even
reading and dubious facts come to be
perceived as unquestionable and indeed
people even are offended if you question
these so-called facts that are really
just things people say sometimes in a
quotation superimposed on a photograph
of a beaut
a landscape on Instagram or you know
maybe on Twitter it's just text on a
plain background but it's things people
have said again and again and the people
who are participating in reblogging
retweeting thumbs up giving the heart to
these expressions
none of them are questioning where does
this come from nor were the intentions
of this being created and where does
this where's this lead us so a few days
ago as an example I had a face-to-face
confrontation with two police officers
here who made it clear to me that they
had absolutely no interest in enforcing
the law even we were talking about
people who were in possession of hard
drugs something like methamphetamine
fentanyl or cocaine and who have been
witnessed by two people and with
photographs using these are drugs this
is possession and use flagrantly in
public the police did that absolutely no
interest in making an arrest interesting
conversation ensued and one of the
police officers said to me self
confidently they say people say they say
we're making the transition over to
having a system more like Portugal where
he alleges you know these illegal drugs
are permissible where you know hard
drugs have been decriminalized and I
said back to them that's just not true
in Portugal people are arrested for
possession of these drugs people are
arrested for using drugs in public or
what-have-you they were arrested for
possession they're just not sent to
criminal court they're sent to what's
called the courts of dissuasion it's a
separate court system that just
specifically handles drug addicts so you
can imagine if you live in a big city
like Los Angeles you can imagine what an
advantage that would be even pubic
radically to have one court system that
deals with all the real crime and all
the other cases and then a separate
specialized set of judges prosecutors
and what-have-you
who are just dealing with drug addicts
who you know have a different kind of
record and say well the last time you
came to this court we sent you to rehab
and that didn't work so now you've come
back and what are we gonna do with you
now so what Portugal did was to separate
and specialize the attempts to have
interventions helping drug addicts from
the rest of criminal law right but it's
not the case that in Portugal it's
acceptable to be a truck addict they
didn't try to normalize the use of
heroin cocaine methamphetamine as
recreational drugs it's it's really just
not true anyway I said this briefly to
the cop and I could see on the
expression of his on his face one of the
cops that this actually was familiar to
him he dreads something that sounded
like that he was like oh right you know
I could god did he get through but he's
obviously living in a subculture or a
bubble and it may just even be other
cops telling him this or maybe messages
on Facebook or Instagram or Twitter
where people on the left are repeating a
myth about drug laws in Portugal about
how Portugal as the solution and the
solution isn't arresting people and
isn't taking people to court and as an
enforcement law and everyone's repeating
that again and again and none of them
are doing the basic fact-checking of
even just reading like one newspaper
article that describes how the system
works in Portugal and what its
advantages and disadvantages are because
you know if you read it article like
that
it wouldn't all be good news there'd be
some good and some bad to the tale to be
told so my conversation with Anna of
Anna's analysis turn to this problem of
people like herself
people most definitely including herself
posting and recycling statements about
Buddhism about what is the teaching and
what is the doctrine of Buddhism that
are not true that are not accurate that
nobody has even say read a newspaper
article about
and you know she was pretty defensive
and hostile from the start but her level
of aggravation escalated quickly and
when she ends up saying to me in this
very self-righteous voice like how could
I possibly think that it's not the
teaching of the Buddha to live in the
moment and to live for the moment
now what I've been trying to tell her up
to like the very end of this
conversation after the final portion of
our speaking I was trying to tell her in
a very calm and helpful way look I have
more than 10 years of background as a
scholar of Buddhism I actually learned
Palelei actually but the Canon I can
tell you about this as much or as little
as you want and I have peer-reviewed
publications and I've been around the
world I've lived in these countries have
studied languages I have this kind of
depth of experience I'm I can tell you
as much as or as little as you want but
no you're demanding of me you're asking
to know this is very much the word
introduced you're asking what is the
harm of you posting and recirculating
these lies about Buddhism but at the
same time you're really demonstrating to
me exactly what the harm is this is
exactly the danger of fake news because
you're acting self-righteous and
offended even when you know that I'm
really an expert in Buddhism and you
know nothing about ism your self
consciously spurred me your self
confidently saying to me how could it
possibly be that this meme this
illustration of posted on Instagram is
wrong and you're right how do you really
mean to tell me like that's just
preposterous that the Buddha didn't
teach people that they should live in
the moment I live for the moment all
right no you guys already guessed the
doctrine of Buddhism is not that people
should live in the moment live for them
oh it's not right mmm the poly Canon
teaches you many things and maybe you
could bend over backwards to take half a
sentence out of context from some
instructions that are being given of a
meditation and try to misrepresent that
as if the
Buddhism is living in the moment for the
moment but no that is a doctrine for
self-indulgence wealthy white Western
people in the 21st century
and it might actually be really
worthwhile people to examine where that
doctrine comes from what motivations
they have in propounding in and what
that leads to like what are the
consequences for your life if you start
believing and living by this doctrine
but she was so self-confident I would
even say she was so self-righteous in
defending her version of Buddhism what
if she thinks she knows about Buddhism
even though that's just based on little
clips of text in front of like images of
a beautiful scenery posted on Instagram
like these little memes right these
little spiritual soup song you know they
can get put on the Internet um but those
quotations they take on their sense of
power because within your social circle
it's not just you who's posting them
maybe it's all your friends it's
everyone you know who's posting them
it's other people you respect and look
up to who are giving it the thumbs up or
the red heart button or who are leaving
comments and yeah that's a great saying
that's a good phrase your idea of
Buddhism were more broadly your idea of
spirituality your idea of truth in this
way it's almost like self-selected
brainwashing and then when you meet one
person who challenges you on that this
is happening many times the Internet in
different political context look when
you meet one person challenges you and
says wait you know that's not what the
law in Portugal actually is you know
that's not the way rehabilitation and
the court system in Portugal works at
all where did you hear that how did you
come to that conclusion and the real
answer is it's just something all my
friends seem to be saying on the
internet right wait wait a minute that's
not the teaching of the Buddha that's
that's not the doctor and our philosophy
that
it's not what the ocean at all why did
you why did you create that image why
did you post that image of literally
putting those words in the Buddha's
mouth and pretending presenting that as
the as the content of Buddhism um and
when people come back to you with this
self-righteous indignation which is
basically you know how dare you
interrupt my enjoyment of this long
ongoing process of the blind leading the
blind because that that's what they like
that's what they want to do and they
don't engage in that as if it were a
game they're engaging in that process of
the blind leading the blind
as if it were the most meaningful as if
it were the most rewarding thing in
their lives indeed as if it were a kind
of hallowed spiritual mission as if it
had great philosophical weight for them
so we have a bit of a discourse in the
21st century
questioning fake news and
stereotypically fake news is thought of
as something from the right wing and as
something motivated with very definite
ends right so maybe a stereotypical
example of fake news would be right-wing
conservatives spreading lies about
abortion and abortion clinics and then
if you ask the move of this because they
will very often admit that what they're
presenting is false serves as rated they
will say to you that from their
perspective they're trying to save human
lives they feel that their sense of
moral purpose is so important that it
justifies lying or spreading this
different misinformation or
what-have-you that's maybe the
stereotype but the real danger of fake
news and and falsehoods being spread on
social media I feel is that people get
into participating in it all the time
with no particular motivation this girl
this youtuber and his analysis she
doesn't think of herself as a Buddhist
she doesn't think result as being
motivated to lie about Buddhism she
doesn't think of ourselves be motivated
tell the truth about
she's not trying to propound it she's
not trying to criticize it she doesn't
think about this way but she's in a
subculture where she's hearing this back
from so many different voices and her
own voice has joined the cacophony of
making these spiritual and pseudo
philosophical pronouncements and again I
can tell you that I've heard the tone of
her voice when she was saying this there
was no way to shake her out of her sense
of certainty that this is something she
knows even though she's never read a
single book about it she's never read a
single newspaper article about it um and
she said very self-righteously that she
has friends who are Buddhists she
presumably means white Western people
who don't speak any Asian language who
can't read Chinese Japanese Tibetan or
any of those languages let alone Pali
sorry it is Pali not Sanskrit you need
to learn that well forever but ism not
burmese not cambodian but anyway it
would help if you knew a language like
burmese cambodian lotion or whatever
over these are presumably white Western
people who were also into yoga and
spiritual quotations on Instagram simply
through this effect of the crowd echoing
back to you your own self righteous
ignorance this sense of walking together
the blind leading the blind and loving
it there's something tremendously
dangerous here
and I see the danger most of all in
terms of drug policy both in terms of
the private decisions people are making
to get involved with psychedelic drugs
for example like LSD ayahuasca and
someone on the basis of the positive
experiences they've heard others had
very often in the same form a quotation
from ROM dass or a quotation from Sam
Harris one of the other people who tries
to glamorize and spiritualize these
these drugs all the way over to the
question of what do we do now in the
year 2020 when we have epidemic levels
of addiction to fentanyl and other
opioids on the street when we have
epidemic levels of mass mass addiction
to methamphetamines and other stimulants
on the streets where do we go from here
and the answer can't possibly be arrived
at through this self-righteous cycle of
people patting themselves on the back
the blind leading the blind sooner or
later someone has to stand up and say
how do you know that why do you think
you know that is anyone really learning
these things empirically is anyone
really open-minded enough to at least
ask the right questions so together we
can share our doubts share whatever it
is we've learned and eventually come to
the right answers